# SingHMOF

Hierarchical Cell Type Identification and Characterization with Multiple Objectives at Single-Cell Resolution in Human

The advent of single-cell RNA-seq provides unparalleled opportunities for elucidating gene expression profiles at the single-cell level. However, there is not any clear definition to the formal cell type identification. To address the challenge, we aspire to develop a hierarchical multiobjective framework called SingHMOF to identify novel cell types from large-scale single-cell RNA-seq data in a fully automated and integrated manner. For clustering, we propose and formulate a single-cell multi-objective evolutionary clustering for cell clustering under multiple cluster internal validity indices. For classification, multiobjective tree classification is presented to distinguish cell types by synergizing multiobjective evolutionary optimization with random forest on deep auto-encoder-transformed data.  In particular, multiobjective evolutionary optimization is employed to prune those tree-classifications to balance model generality and complexity for robust performance. To demonstrate SingHMOF's capabilities, we comprehensively validate its performance on single-cell liver data, human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), and mixed multiple datasets to identify and characterize novel cell types. The numerical results reveal that SingHMOF can achieve competitive performance over the current state-of-the-art methods up to thousands of cells. In addition, it also demonstrates that SingHMOF can be directly implemented to analyze new single-cell RNA-seq data and can characterize the non-linear the relationships between diverse features, revealing novel observations into cell type identification. Meanwhile, Gene ontology enrichment and pathology analysis are conducted for novel cell type characterizations.


Dataset

We collected single-cell RNA-seq liver data from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) through accession number GSE115469. The liver data contains the transcriptional profiles of 8444 parenchymal and non-parenchymal cells of five healthy neurologically deceased donors by 10X Genomics \cite{macparland2018single}.
